[js] Address manager tutorial (#794)
SAP/cloud-sdk: docs/js/tutorials/address-manager/read-addresses.mdx

---
id: read-addresses
title: Building an Address Manager with the SAP Cloud SDK - Part 1
sidebar_label: Read Address Data
description: Build an Address Manager with the SAP Cloud SDK - Part 1
keywords:
  - sap
  - cloud
  - sdk
  - cloud native
  - cloud sdk
  - sap cloud sdk
  - tutorial
  - address manager
---

## Overview

In the SAP S/4HANA data model, addresses are related to the business partner entity.
Each business partner can have multiple addresses assigned.
The application will provide a REST API to manage addresses of business partners.
In this part of the tutorial you will create the endpoints reading data.
You will learn:

- How to retrieve a single business partner.
- How to retrieve the addresses of a business partner

The tutorial is based on the initial NestJs application explained in the [first part of the getting started tutorials](../getting-started/1-set-up-dev-environment.mdx)
In that tutorial you already created a first OData request to get [a list of business partners](../getting-started/2-execute-odata-request.mdx).
You will extend the functionality of the API in this tutorial and the [follow up part](./change-addresses.mdx).

> Since the follow up part is about changing data, we recommend to use a local mock system.

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/56544999/168794320-cdfd588f-af06-46d2-9a3b-263c7f7569c9.png)

      )
      .top(10)
      .execute({ url: 'http://localhost:3000' });
  }
}
```

As you can see, each property you select is represented by an object on the `businessPartnerApi` schema.
To keep the code shorter the `businessPartnerApi` has been assigned to a local variable.
If you type `businessPartnerApi.schema.` in your IDE, you will see all the properties that can be selected on this entity.
This saves you from having to look up the properties in the metadata and prevents errors due to mistyping.

If you open the URL `http://localhost:8080/business-partners`, you should see only the ID, first name, and last name of the business partners.

### Filter Business Partners by Type

Business partners can either be natural persons or legal persons (e.g. organizations or companies).
For the address manager, we only want the addresses of natural persons.
Therefore, you need to filter our request.
Modify your code like this:

```ts
businessPartnerApi
      .requestBuilder()
      .getAll()
      .select(
        businessPartnerApi.schema.BUSINESS_PARTNER,
        businessPartnerApi.schema.FIRST_NAME,
        businessPartnerApi.schema.LAST_NAME
      )
      .filter(

>           businessPartnerApi.schema.BUSINESS_PARTNER_CATEGORY.equals('1')

Author: hm, good question. You go in backend. Open table `but000` check the domain for the category and go to the value range: 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/56544999/168805680-6aa0c363-6fe0-4e24-88f2-623c297a98ca.png)

>           businessPartnerApi.schema.BUSINESS_PARTNER_CATEGORY.equals('1')

Reviewer: 🤦‍♂️

    businessPartnerApi.schema.TO_BUSINESS_PARTNER_ADDRESS.select(
      businessPartnerAddressApi.schema.BUSINESS_PARTNER,
      businessPartnerAddressApi.schema.ADDRESS_ID
      businessPartnerAddressApi.schema.POSTAL_CODE,
      businessPartnerAddressApi.schema.CITY_NAME,
      businessPartnerAddressApi.schema.STREET_NAME,
      businessPartnerAddressApi.schema.HOUSE_NUMBER
    )
  )
  .execute({ url: 'http://localhost:3000' });
```

Properties like `POSTAL_CODE`, `CITY_NAME`, and so on are part of the address API and related schema.
The `businessPartnerAddressApi` is also part of the business partner service.
If you call the URL `http://localhost:8080/business-partners/<yourId>`, the service returns a single business partner with the selected address information:

```json
{
  "businessPartner": "1003765",
  "firstName": "Jane",
  "lastName": "Roe",
  "toBusinessPartnerAddress": [
    {
      "businessPartner": "1003765",
      "addressId": "28241",
      "cityName": "Palo Alto",
      "houseNumber": "3410",
      "postalCode": "CA 94304",
      "streetName": "Hillview Avenue"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Summary

In this tutorial you have created an API to read business partners.

> You created endpoints to read a list of business partner as well as a specific business partners by ID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You created endpoints to read a list of business partners as well as a specific business partner by ID.
```

[req] typo

---
id: read-addresses
title: Building an Address Manager Application with the SAP Cloud SDK - Part 1
sidebar_label: Read Address Data
description: Build an Address Manager Application with the SAP Cloud SDK - Part 1
keywords:
  - sap
  - cloud
  - sdk
  - cloud native
  - cloud sdk
  - sap cloud sdk
  - tutorial
  - address manager
---

## Overview

In the SAP S/4HANA data model, Addresses are related to the business partner entity.
Each business partner can have multiple addresses assigned.
The application will provide a REST API to manage addresses of business partners.
In this part of the tutorial we will create the endpoints reading data.
You will learn:

- How to read a single business partner.
- How to read the addresses of a business partner

> The tutorial is based on the initial `NestJs` application explained in the [first part of the getting started tutorials](../getting-started/1-set-up-dev-environment.mdx)

Author: the linked file is the 1st part of three steps in which the nest cli is installed and a hello world endpoint is introduced. So I think this should be fine?

In this tutorial you already created a first OData request to get [list of business partners](../getting-started/2-execute-odata-request.mdx).
We will extend the functionality of the API in this tutorial.

> Since this involves also changing data we recommend to use the local mock system.

Author: hm you are right, but I would prefer to stick to one system for both parts of the tutorial. I will try to motivate this a bit better

Changing data is not possible on API hub and an actual SAP S/4HANA instance should not be polluted with test data.
Note that both systems run locally but have different ports:

- `localhost:3000` is the mock system mimicking the SAP S/4HANA system
- `localhost:8080` is the address manager application you develop in the tutorial

## Get All Business Partners

### Recap Existing Service

> In the previous [tutorial you created](../getting-started/2-execute-odata-request.mdx) you created a OData request to retrieve business partners.

Author: the link above mentioned the 1st part where the application is scaffolded. Here the part is linked where the odata request is added.

> In the previous [tutorial you created](../getting-started/2-execute-odata-request.mdx) you created a OData request to retrieve business partners.

Reviewer: There is still a duplication:

> In the previous tutorial you created you created a OData request.

Also I noticed it should be "an OData" request and adjusted the suggestion above.

You included the following code in your `business-partner.service.ts`

```ts
import { Injectable } from '@nestjs/common';
import {
  BusinessPartner,
  businessPartnerService
} from '@sap/cloud-sdk-vdm-business-partner-service';

@Injectable()
export class BusinessPartnerService {
  getAllBusinessPartners(): Promise<BusinessPartner[]> {
    return businessPartnerService()
      .businessPartnerApi.requestBuilder()
      .getAll()
      .addCustomHeaders({ apikey: process.env.APIKey })
      .execute({ url: 'http://localhost:3000' });
  }
}
```

Let's walk you through the implementation of the service as a recap.
You have imported the `businessPartnerService` which offers you many API and you picked the `businessPartnerApi`.
With this API your requested all business partners using the `getAll` request builder.

> As discussed, use the local [mock system](https://sap.github.io/cloud-s4-sdk-book/pages/mock-odata.html) and provided the `url` directly.

Reviewer: [req] Is this imperative? I would prefer if a subject is mentioned: "you should use the local mock system..."
[req] grammar: use + provide or used + provided

> In real applications you would use a proper system and the [destination service](../../features/connectivity/destination) to avoid hard coding system properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In real applications you would use a real SAP S/4HANA system and the [destination service](../../features/connectivity/destination) to avoid leaking private or secret information through hard-coding system properties.
```
[pp] "proper system" is unclear to me without context
[pp] I prefer using a hyphen here. Also a case for the style guide?
[nth] Give context why hard-coding is bad

### Test Service

You can start your application using:

```Shell
npm start
```

When the server is running, you should see a message like: `[NestApplication] Nest application successfully started` and some mappings related to the listed controllers.
Open the URL `http://localhost:8080/business-partners` and you should see the data of the mock server.

### Select certain Fields

> The output from the previous sections showed all fields of the business partner entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output from the previous sections shows all fields of the business partner entity.
```
[nth] Keep it in the present tense

Like SQL, OData allows to only select specific properties of an entity.

> For our address manager, we only want to know the ID, the first name and the last name of a business partner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For our address manager, we only want to know the ID, first name, and last name of a business partner.
```
[pp] Oxford comma + removed repeated "the"

> Add a select statement to the service implementation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a `select` statement to the service implementation:
```
[q] As this is a ... statement, it implies a code context. Should this use an inline code block? (input for style guide)

```ts
const { businessPartnerApi } = businessPartnerService();

@Injectable()
export class BusinessPartnerService {
  getAllBusinessPartners(): Promise<BusinessPartner[]> {
    return businessPartnerApi
      .requestBuilder()
      .getAll()
      .select(
        businessPartnerApi.schema.BUSINESS_PARTNER,
        businessPartnerApi.schema.FIRST_NAME,
        businessPartnerApi.schema.LAST_NAME
      )
      .top(10)
      .execute({ url: 'http://localhost:3000' });
  }
}
```

As you can see, each property we select is represented by an object on the `businessPartnerApi` schema.
To keep the code shorter the `businessPartnerApi` has been assigned to a local variable.

> If you type `businessPartnerApi.schema.` in your IDE, you will see all the properties the can be selected on that entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you type `businessPartnerApi.schema.` in your IDE, you will see all the properties that can be selected on this entity.
```
[req] typo

> This saves you from having to look up the properties in the metadata, and prevents errors due to mistyping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This saves you from having to look up the properties in the metadata and prevents errors due to mistyping.
```
[req] I am fairly sure this is an unnecessary or wrong comma.

> If you open the URL `http://localhost:8080/business-partners` you should see only the ID, first name and last name of the business partners.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you open the URL `http://localhost:8080/business-partners`, you should see only the ID, first name, and last name of the business partners.
```
[pp] Oxford comma

### Filter Business Partners by Type

Business partners can either be natural persons or legal persons (e.g. organizations or companies).
For the address manager, we only want the addresses of natural persons.
Therefore, we need to filter our request.
Modify your code like this:

```ts
businessPartnerApi
      .requestBuilder()
      .getAll()
      .select(
        businessPartnerApi.schema.BUSINESS_PARTNER,
        businessPartnerApi.schema.FIRST_NAME,
        businessPartnerApi.schema.LAST_NAME
      )
      .filter(
          businessPartnerApi.schema.BUSINESS_PARTNER_CATEGORY.equals('1')
      )
      .execute({ url: "http://localhost:3000" });
}
```

As for `select`, you can use the properties of the `BusinessPartner` entity directly for filtering.
Each property offers a set of functions for constructing filters.
Every property has the `equals` and `notEquals` function.

> Depending on that type of the property, there can be additional functions like `greaterThan` or `greaterOrEqual`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the type of the property, there can be additional functions like `greaterThan` or `greaterOrEqual`.
```
[req] typo

> Also, since we know the type of the property, the typed client will prevent you from passing values of the wrong type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we know the type of the property, the typed client will prevent you from passing values of the wrong type.
```
[pp] The "also" is not needed.

> For example, `businessPartnerApi.schema.FIRST_NAME.equals(1)` would not compile (in pure JavaScript the code would only fail at runtime, but most editors will still raise a warning for the type mismatch).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, `businessPartnerApi.schema.FIRST_NAME.equals(1)` would not compile when using TypeScript.
In JavaScript, the code would fail at run-time, but your editor may raise a warning for the type mismatch.
```
[pp] I think we should follow this for spelling: https://english.stackexchange.com/a/197688 (TL;DR runtime = Java runtime, run-time = during execution, run time = duration of execution)

For more complicated filter conditions have a look at the [filter documentation](../../features/odata/use-odata-v2-type-safe-client-for-javascript-typescript#filter).

## Get Addresses of Business Partner

As a first step we created an endpoint for obtaining a list of business partners.

> However, we are interested in the addresses related to one business partner object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, we are interested in the addresses related to one specific business partner object.
```
[pp] I think this makes it easier to read.

In this part of the tutorial we will create the services to read the addresses.

### Get one Business Partner

We are interested in the addresses related to one business partner.

> Therefore, we create a query for fetching one specific business partner.

Reviewer: [nth] This is repeating itself quite often (especially with the last sentence of the section above). Consider combing the sentences.

> Each business partner has a unique ID which can be used to do that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each business partner has a unique ID which you can use to do that.
```
[nth] passive voice

Include a second method in the existing `business-partner.service.ts`

```ts
getBusinessPartnerById(id: string): Promise<BusinessPartner> {
    return businessPartnerApi
      .requestBuilder()
      .getByKey(id)
      .execute({ url: 'http://localhost:3000' });
}
```

> As before, we call `businessPartnerApi.requestBuilder()` to select the type of request we want to build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As before, you call `businessPartnerApi.requestBuilder()` to select the type of request you want to build.
```
[nth] There should be a consistency across the article if you talk about "we" or "you" (also input for the style guide?)

Since we only want to get a single business partner, we use the `getByKey` function and then call `execute` to execute the request.

> We use again the local mock server as for the `getAll` request from the previous section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Again, we use the local mock server from the previous section for the `getAll` request.
```
[nth] Improve sentence structure

As a next step you need to expose the service via the controller.
Open the `business-partner.controller.ts` and add the following method:

```ts
@Get('/:id')
getBusinessPartnerById(@Param('id') id: string): Promise<BusinessPartner> {
    return this.businessPartnerService.getBusinessPartnerById(id);
}
```

The method takes the ID from the URL and passes it to `getBusinessPartnerById` in the service class.
If a business partner with the provided ID exists in the target system, it will be sent to the client.
Otherwise, an error message is sent.

### Test Service

Restart your server and open `http://localhost:8080/business-partners` to get the list of all business partners.
Copy one ID from the result list and execute `http://localhost:8080/business-partners/<yourId>`.

> You should see the details on the chosen business partner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see the details of the chosen business partner.
```
[req] typo

> Note that Nest application have a build in [exception filter](https://docs.nestjs.com/exception-filters), which maps exceptions to http messages shown to the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that Nest applications have a built-in [exception filter](https://docs.nestjs.com/exception-filters), which maps exceptions to http messages shown to the client.
```
[req] typo

By default the exceptions from the SAP Cloud SDK are mapped to a server side error.

> So if you provide a non existing ID you will receive a 500 response and not a 404.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So if you provide a non-existing ID, you will receive a 500 response and not a 404.
```
[pp] hyphen
[req] comma

### Navigate to Address

As mentioned before, the address is a separate OData entity related to the business partner.

> In OData lingo the address is a navigation property of the business partner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In OData the address is a navigation property of the business partner.
```
[pp] "lingo" could be an unknown word and confuse readers

> If you want include such a related property in the query result you have to include it in the select statement:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to include such a related property in the query result, you have to include it in the select statement:
```
[req] add "to" + comma

```ts
return businessPartnerApi
  .requestBuilder()
  .getByKey(id)
  .select(
    businessPartnerApi.schema.BUSINESS_PARTNER,
    businessPartnerApi.schema.FIRST_NAME,
    businessPartnerApi.schema.LAST_NAME,
    businessPartnerApi.schema.TO_BUSINESS_PARTNER_ADDRESS
  )
  .execute({ url: 'http://localhost:3000' });
```

> This implicitly expands the property and includes all properties like street, house number, state... of the address in the result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This implicitly expands the property and includes all properties like street, house number, and state of the address in the result.
```
[pp] ellipsis is not needed when putting "like" before an enumeration

> Also here we are interested only in few properties of the address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also here we are interested only in some properties of the address.
```
[req] "a few" or "some"

A second select on the navigation property reduces the response to the desired fields:

```ts
const { businessPartnerAddressApi } = businessPartnerService();

return businessPartnerApi
  .requestBuilder()
  .getByKey(id)
  .addCustomHeaders({ apikey: process.env.APIKey })
  .select(
    businessPartnerApi.schema.BUSINESS_PARTNER,
    businessPartnerApi.schema.FIRST_NAME,
    businessPartnerApi.schema.LAST_NAME,
    businessPartnerApi.schema.TO_BUSINESS_PARTNER_ADDRESS.select(
      businessPartnerAddressApi.schema.BUSINESS_PARTNER,
      businessPartnerAddressApi.schema.ADDRESS_ID
      businessPartnerAddressApi.schema.POSTAL_CODE,
      businessPartnerAddressApi.schema.CITY_NAME,
      businessPartnerAddressApi.schema.STREET_NAME,
      businessPartnerAddressApi.schema.HOUSE_NUMBER
    )
  )
  .execute({ url: 'http://localhost:3000' });
```

> Note that properties like `POSTAL_CODE`, `CITY_NAME` and so on, are part of the address API and related schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Properties like `POSTAL_CODE`, `CITY_NAME`, and so on are part of the address API and related schema.
```
[pp] Oxford comma
[req] Remove unnecessary/wrong comma

The `businessPartnerAddressApi` is also part of the business partner service.

> If you call the URL `http://localhost:8080/business-partners/<yourId>`, the service should return a single partner with the selected address information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you call the URL `http://localhost:8080/business-partners/<yourId>`, the service returns a single business partner with the selected address information:
```
[pp] I think "should" is not necessary

Each business partner can have multiple addresses assigned.
You will develop an application which provides a REST API to manage addresses of business partners.
In this part of the tutorial you will create the endpoints reading data.
You will learn:

- How to retrieve a single business partner.
- How to retrieve the addresses of a business partner.

The tutorial is based on the initial NestJs application explained in the [first part of the getting started tutorials](../getting-started/1-set-up-dev-environment.mdx).
In that tutorial you already created [a first OData request](../getting-started/2-execute-odata-request.mdx) to get a list of business partners.
You will extend the functionality of the API in this tutorial and the [follow up part](./change-addresses.mdx).
Since the follow-up part is about changing data, we recommend to use a [local mock system](https://sap.github.io/cloud-s4-sdk-book/pages/mock-odata.html).
Changing data is not possible on SAP API Business Hub and an actual SAP S/4HANA instance should not be polluted with test data.
Note that both systems run locally but have different ports:

> - `localhost:3000` is the mock system imitating the SAP S/4HANA system
> - `localhost:8080` is the address manager application you develop in the tutorial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `localhost:3000` is the mock system imitating the SAP S/4HANA system.
- `localhost:8080` is the address manager application you develop in the tutorial.
```
[pp] For consistency, there should be a period at then end of "sentence-style" bullets.

### Recap Existing Service

In the previous [tutorial](../getting-started/2-execute-odata-request.mdx) you created a OData request to retrieve business partners.
You included the following code in your `business-partner.service.ts`

```ts
import { Injectable } from '@nestjs/common';
import {
  BusinessPartner,
  businessPartnerService
} from '@sap/cloud-sdk-vdm-business-partner-service';

@Injectable()
export class BusinessPartnerService {
  getAllBusinessPartners(): Promise<BusinessPartner[]> {
    return businessPartnerService()
      .businessPartnerApi.requestBuilder()
      .getAll()
      .addCustomHeaders({ apikey: process.env.APIKey })
      .execute({ url: 'http://localhost:3000' });
  }
}
```

Let's walk you through the implementation of the service as a recap.
You have imported the `businessPartnerService` which offers you many APIs and you picked the `businessPartnerApi`.
With this API you requested all business partners using the `getAll` request builder.
As discussed, you should use the local [mock system](https://sap.github.io/cloud-s4-sdk-book/pages/mock-odata.html).
For simplicity the `url` is passed directly to the `execute()` method.

> In real applications you would use a real SAP S/4HANA system and the [destination service](../../features/connectivity/destination) to avoid leaking private or secret information through hard-coding system properties.

Reviewer: [pp] 
```suggestion

::: danger

In real applications you would use a real SAP S/4HANA system and the [destination service](../../features/connectivity/destination) to avoid leaking private or secret information through hard-coding system properties.

:::
```
[pp] This could be an admonition, but it's a stylistic choice and up to you.

@Injectable()
export class BusinessPartnerService {
  getAllBusinessPartners(): Promise<BusinessPartner[]> {
    return businessPartnerApi
      .requestBuilder()
      .getAll()
      .select(
        businessPartnerApi.schema.BUSINESS_PARTNER,
        businessPartnerApi.schema.FIRST_NAME,
        businessPartnerApi.schema.LAST_NAME
      )
      .top(10)
      .execute({ url: 'http://localhost:3000' });
  }
}
```

As you can see, each property you select is represented by a property of the `businessPartnerApi` schema.
To keep the code shorter, the `businessPartnerApi` has been assigned to a local variable.
If your IDE supports code completion, you can see all properties that can be selected on this entity by typing `businessPartnerApi.schema.`.
Depending on your IDE, the list may show automatically or when you trigger the code completion manually (often by pressing `Ctrl` + `Space`).
This saves you from having to look up the properties in the metadata and prevents errors due to mistyping.

If you open the URL `http://localhost:8080/business-partners`, you should see only the ID, first name, and last name of the business partners.

> ![](../img/get-all-business-partners.png)

Reviewer: [nth] Alt text
